
     Overview effusion

Pericardial effusion (per-e-KAHR-dee-ul uh-FU-zhun) is the buildup of too much
fluid in the double-layered, saclike structure around the heart (pericardium).
The space between these layers typically contains a thin layer of fluid. But
if the pericardium is diseased or injured, the resulting inflammation can lead
to excess fluid. Fluid can also build up around the heart without
inflammation, such as from bleeding, related to a cancer or after chest
trauma.
Pericardial effusion can put pressure on the heart, affecting how the heart
works. If untreated, it may lead to heart failure or death in extreme cases.

     Symptoms
Pericardial effusion may not cause any noticeable signs and symptoms,
particularly if the fluid has increased slowly.

If pericardial effusion signs and symptoms do occur, they might include:

Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing (dyspnea)
Discomfort when breathing while lying down
Chest pain, usually behind the breastbone or on the left side of the chest
Chest fullness
Lightheadedness or feeling faint
Swelling in the abdomen or legs
     When to see a doctor
Call  your local emergency number if you feel chest pain that lasts more
than a few minutes, if your breathing is difficult or painful, or if you have
an unexplained fainting spell.
See your health care provider if you have shortness of breath.
     Causes
Pericardial effusion can result from inflammation of the pericardium
(pericarditis) after an illness or injury. In some settings, large effusions
may be caused by certain cancers. A blockage of pericardial fluids or a
collection of blood within the pericardium also can lead to this condition.
Sometimes the cause can't be determined (idiopathic pericarditis).
Causes of pericardial effusion may include:

Autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus
Cancer of the heart or pericardium
Spread of cancer (metastasis), particularly lung cancer, breast cancer or Hodgkin's lymphoma
Radiation therapy for cancer if the heart was in the area of the radiation
Chest trauma
Inflammation of the pericardium following a heart attack or after heart surgery or a procedure where the heart's lining is injured
Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism)
Use of certain drugs or exposure to toxins
Viral, bacterial, fungal or parasitic infections
Waste products in the blood due to kidney failure (uremia)

Complications
A potential complication of pericardial effusion is cardiac tamponade (tam-
pon-AYD). In this condition, the excess fluid within the pericardium puts
pressure on the heart. The strain prevents the heart chambers from filling
completely with blood.
Cardiac tamponade results in poor blood flow and a lack of oxygen to the body.
Cardiac tamponade is life-threatening and requires emergency medical
treatment.

