

Emphysema
Symptoms &  

When to see a doctor

See your doctor if you've had unexplained shortness of breath for several
months, especially if it's getting worse or it's interfering with your daily
activities. Don't ignore it by telling yourself it's because you're aging or
out of shape. Seek immediate medical attention if:

You're so short of breath, you can't climb stairs
Your lips or fingernails turn blue or gray with exertion
You're not mentally alert
There is a problem with information submitted for this request. Review/update
the information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand
which information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage
information with other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic
patient, this could include protected health information. If we combine this
information with your protected health information, we will treat all of that
information as protected health information and will only use or disclose that
information as set forth in our notice of privacy practices. You may opt-out
of email communications at any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link in the
e-mail.
Causes
The main cause of emphysema is long-term exposure to airborne irritants,
including:

Tobacco smoke
Marijuana smoke
Air pollution
Chemical fumes and dust

Rarely, emphysema is caused by an inherited deficiency of a protein that
protects the elastic structures in the lungs. It's called alpha-1-antitrypsin
deficiency emphysema.
In emphysema, the inner walls of the lungs' air sacs (alveoli) are damaged,
causing them to eventually rupture. This creates one larger air space instead
of many small ones and reduces the surface area available for gas exchange.

Emphysema is a lung condition that causes shortness of breath. In people with
emphysema, the air sacs in the lungs (alveoli) are damaged. Over time, the
inner walls of the air sacs weaken and rupture -- creating larger air spaces
instead of many small ones. This reduces the surface area of the lungs and, in
turn, the amount of oxygen that reaches your bloodstream.

When you exhale, the damaged alveoli don't work properly and old air becomes
trapped, leaving no room for fresh, oxygen-rich air to enter.

Most people with emphysema also have chronic bronchitis. Chronic bronchitis is
inflammation of the tubes that carry air to your lungs (bronchial tubes),
which leads to a persistent cough.

Emphysema and chronic bronchitis are two conditions that make up chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Smoking is the leading cause of COPD.
Treatment may slow the progression of COPD, but it can't reverse the damage.
Symptoms

You can have emphysema for many years without noticing any signs or symptoms.
The main symptom of emphysema is shortness of breath, which usually begins
gradually.

You may start avoiding activities that cause you to be short of breath, so the
symptom doesn't become a problem until it starts interfering with daily tasks.
Emphysema eventually causes shortness of breath even while you're at rest.


Risk factors

Factors that increase your risk of developing emphysema include:

Smoking.         Emphysema is most likely to develop in cigarette smokers, but cigar and pipe smokers also are susceptible. The risk for all types of smokers increases with the number of years and amount of tobacco smoked.
Age.         Although the lung damage that occurs in emphysema develops gradually, most people with tobacco-related emphysema begin to experience symptoms of the disease between the ages of 40 and 60.
Exposure to secondhand smoke.         Secondhand smoke, also known as passive or environmental tobacco smoke, is smoke that you inadvertently inhale from someone else's cigarette, pipe or cigar. Being around secondhand smoke increases your risk of emphysema.
Occupational exposure to fumes or dust.         If you breathe fumes from certain chemicals or dust from grain, cotton, wood or mining products, you're more likely to develop emphysema. This risk is even greater if you smoke.
Exposure to indoor and outdoor pollution.         Breathing indoor pollutants, such as fumes from heating fuel, as well as outdoor pollutants -- car exhaust, for instance -- increases your risk of emphysema.
Complications

People who have emphysema are also more likely to develop:

Collapsed lung (pneumothorax).         A collapsed lung can be life-threatening in people who have severe emphysema, because the function of their lungs is already so compromised. This is uncommon but serious when it occurs.
Heart problems.         Emphysema can increase the pressure in the arteries that connect the heart and lungs. This can cause a condition called cor pulmonale, in which a section of the heart expands and weakens.
Large holes in the lungs (bullae).         Some people with emphysema develop empty spaces in the lungs called bullae. They can be as large as half the lung. In addition to reducing the amount of space available for the lung to expand, giant bullae can increase your risk of pneumothorax.
Prevention
To prevent emphysema, don't smoke and avoid breathing secondhand smoke. Wear a
mask to protect your lungs if you work with chemical fumes or dust.

