Signs and symptoms
The common constitutional symptoms of viral pneumonia are as follows:

Fever
Chills
Nonproductive cough
Rhinitis

Myalgias

Headaches

Fatigue

During physical examination, the patient may also display the following:

Tachypnea and/or dyspnea

Tachycardia or bradycardia

Wheezing

Rhonchi

Rales

Sternal or intercostal retractions

Dullness to percussion

Decreased breath sounds

Pleurisy

Pleural friction rub

Cyanosis

Rash

Acute respiratory distress

Influenza pneumonia

The influenza viruses are the most common viral cause of pneumonia. Primary influenza pneumonia manifests with persistent symptoms of cough, sore throat, headache, myalgia, and malaise for more than three to five days. The symptoms may worsen with time, and new respiratory signs and symptoms, such as dyspnea and cyanosis, appear.

Respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most frequent cause of lower respiratory tract infection in infants and children and the second most common viral cause of pneumonia in adults.

Patients with RSV pneumonia typically present with fever, nonproductive cough, otalgia, anorexia, and dyspnea. Wheezes, rales, and rhonchi are common physical findings.

Parainfluenza virus pneumonia

Parainfluenza virus (PIV) is second in importance only to RSV as a cause of lower respiratory tract disease in children and pneumonia and bronchiolitis in infants younger than 6 months. PIV pneumonia and bronchiolitis are caused primarily by the PIV-3 strain. The signs and symptoms include fever, cough, coryza, dyspnea with rales, and wheezing.

See Clinical Presentation for more detail.

Diagnosis
Laboratory studies

Cytologic evaluation: Intranuclear inclusions often exist in cells infected with a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) virus. Cytoplasmic inclusions usually are present in cells infected with a ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus.

Viral culture

Rapid antigen detection

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay

Serologies: Particularly useful for definitively confirming the diagnosis

Radiography

Chest radiography usually demonstrates bilateral lung involvement, but none of the viral etiologies of pneumonia result in pathognomonic findings with this modality

Lung biopsy and histologic studies

Infrequently, lung biopsy is required to establish a diagnosis in very ill patients, who often are immunocompromised.

See Workup for more detail.

Management
All patients with viral pneumonia must receive supportive care with the following:

Oxygen

Rest

Antipyretics

Analgesics

Nutrition

Close observation

Intravenous fluids

Mechanical ventilation

Specific treatments for the various types of viral pneumonia include the following:

Influenza pneumonia: Amantadine hydrochloride and rimantadine hydrochloride are approved for the prevention and treatment of influenza A virus infection. Their efficacy in patients with influenza viral pneumonia or severe influenza is unknown.

RSV pneumonia: Ribavirin is the only effective antiviral agent available for the treatment of RSV pneumonia, [1] but there are conflicting data regarding its efficacy.

PIV pneumonia: Treatment is mainly supportive, but aerosolized and oral ribavirin have been associated with reduction in PIV shedding and clinical improvement in immunocompromised patients.