Pneumothorax
Symptoms of a pneumothorax can be caused by a variety of health problems, and
some can be life-threatening, so seek medical attention. If your chest pain is
severe or breathing becomes increasingly difficult, get immediate emergency
care.
        Causes

A pneumothorax can be caused by:

Chest injury.                 Any blunt or penetrating injury to your chest can cause lung collapse. Some injuries may happen during physical assaults or car crashes, while others may inadvertently occur during medical procedures that involve the insertion of a needle into the chest.
Lung disease.                 Damaged lung tissue is more likely to collapse. Lung damage can be caused by many types of underlying diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis, lung cancer or pneumonia. Cystic lung diseases, such as lymphangioleiomyomatosis and Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome, cause round, thin-walled air sacs in the lung tissue that can rupture, resulting in pneumothorax.
Ruptured air blisters.                 Small air blisters (blebs) can develop on the top of the lungs. These air blisters sometimes burst -- allowing air to leak into the space that surrounds the lungs.
Mechanical ventilation.                 A severe type of pneumothorax can occur in people who need mechanical assistance to breathe. The ventilator can create an imbalance of air pressure within the chest. The lung may collapse completely.

causes

In a collapsed lung, air from the lung leaks into the chest cavity. The
example shown is a complete left pneumothorax.

A pneumothorax (noo-moe-THOR-aks) is a collapsed lung. A pneumothorax occurs
when air leaks into the space between your lung and chest wall. This air
pushes on the outside of your lung and makes it collapse. A pneumothorax can
be a complete lung collapse or a collapse of only a portion of the lung.

A pneumothorax can be caused by a blunt or penetrating chest injury, certain
medical procedures, or damage from underlying lung disease. Or it may occur
for no obvious reason. Symptoms usually include sudden chest pain and
shortness of breath. On some occasions, a collapsed lung can be a life-
threatening event.

Treatment for a pneumothorax usually involves inserting a needle or chest tube
between the ribs to remove the excess air. However, a small pneumothorax may
heal on its own.
